src/programmable-tokens-onchain-aiken/documentation/02-ARCHITECTURE.md, before:

# Architecture Deep-Dive

This document explains the on-chain architecture of the CIP-113 programmable tokens implementation in Aiken. It covers the ownership model, validator coordination, on-chain data structures, and step-by-step validation flows.

---

## Table of Contents

1. [Ownership Model](#ownership-model)
2. [Validator Architecture](#validator-architecture)
3. [Withdraw-Zero Pattern](#withdraw-zero-pattern)
4. [On-Chain Registry](#on-chain-registry)
5. [Denylist System](#denylist-system)
6. [Data Structures](#data-structures)
7. [Validation Flows](#validation-flows)
8. [Security Properties](#security-properties)

---

## Ownership Model

### Shared Payment Credential + Unique Stake Credentials

The fundamental design insight is that Cardano addresses are composed of two parts: a **payment credential** and a **stake credential**. Programmable tokens exploit this by using a single shared payment credential (the `programmable_logic_base` script hash) while assigning unique stake credentials to individual holders.

```
Cardano Address = Payment Credential + Stake Credential
                  ─────────────────   ────────────────
                  Shared across ALL    Unique per holder
                  programmable tokens  (determines ownership)
```

This means:

- **All programmable tokens live at addresses that share the same payment credential** — the `programmable_logic_base` validator hash. This is what enables unified validation: every spend from this payment credential triggers the same spending validator.
- **Ownership is determined by the stake credential** — either a verification key (for wallet holders) or a script hash (for smart contract-controlled holdings).
- **Wallets require integration** — tokens are native assets at the ledger level, but wallets need to resolve stake-credential-based ownership at the shared script address to display balances correctly.

### Transferring Tokens

A transfer changes the stake credential while keeping the payment credential constant:

```
Before:  addr(programmable_logic_base, stake_alice) → 100 USDC
After:   addr(programmable_logic_base, stake_bob)   → 100 USDC
```

The `programmable_logic_base` payment credential is the same in both cases. What changes is who "owns" the UTxO — determined by the stake credential.

---

## Validator Architecture

The system uses a layered architecture where lightweight validators delegate to a central coordinator.

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Token Custody"
        PLB[programmable_logic_base<br/><i>Spending Validator</i>]
    end

    subgraph "Coordination Layer"
        PLG[programmable_logic_global<br/><i>Stake Validator</i>]
    end

    subgraph "Registry"
        RM[registry_mint<br/><i>Minting Policy</i>]
        RS[registry_spend<br/><i>Spending Validator</i>]
    end

    subgraph "Token Issuance"
        IM[issuance_mint<br/><i>Minting Policy</i>]
        ICH[issuance_cbor_hex_mint<br/><i>Minting Policy</i>]
    end

    subgraph "Protocol Bootstrap"
        PP[protocol_params_mint<br/><i>Minting Policy</i>]
    end

    subgraph "Transfer Logic (Pluggable)"
        TL[example_transfer_logic<br/><i>Stake Validator</i>]
        FES[freeze_and_seize_transfer<br/><i>Stake Validator</i>]
    end

    subgraph "Denylist (Substandard)"
        BM[blacklist_mint<br/><i>Minting Policy</i>]
        BS[blacklist_spend<br/><i>Spending Validator</i>]
    end

    PLB -->|"delegates to"| PLG
    PLG -->|"looks up"| RS
    PLG -->|"invokes"| TL
    PLG -->|"invokes"| FES
    FES -->|"checks"| BS
    RM -->|"validates structure"| RS
    IM -->|"references"| ICH
```

### Validator Reference

| Validator | Type | Parameters | Purpose |
|-----------|------|------------|---------|
| `programmable_logic_base` | Spend | `stake_cred` | Custody of all programmable token UTxOs. Delegates to global validator. |
| `programmable_logic_global` | Stake (withdraw) | `protocol_params_cs` | Core coordinator. Validates transfers, checks registry, invokes transfer logic. |
| `protocol_params_mint` | Mint | `utxo_ref` | One-shot mint of the protocol parameters NFT. |
| `registry_mint` | Mint | `utxo_ref`, `issuance_cbor_hex_cs` | Manages the sorted linked list of registered token policies. |
| `registry_spend` | Spend | `protocol_params_cs` | Guards registry node UTxOs; only allows spending when `registry_mint` is active. |
| `issuance_mint` | Mint | `programmable_logic_base`, `minting_logic_cred` | Mints/burns programmable tokens. Parameterized per token type. |
| `issuance_cbor_hex_mint` | Mint | `utxo_ref` | One-shot mint of the reference NFT holding issuance script template bytes. |
| `example_transfer_logic` | Stake (withdraw) | `permitted_cred` | Simple transfer logic: requires a specific credential to authorize. |
| `freeze_and_seize_transfer` | Stake (withdraw) | `programmable_logic_base_cred`, `blacklist_node_cs` | Denylist-aware transfer logic for regulated tokens. |
| `blacklist_mint` | Mint | `utxo_ref`, `manager_pkh` | Manages the sorted linked list of denylisted credentials. |
| `blacklist_spend` | Spend | `blacklist_cs` | Guards denylist node UTxOs; only allows spending when `blacklist_mint` is active. |

### Dual Validator Delegation

The `programmable_logic_base` validator is intentionally minimal. Its only job is to verify that the `programmable_logic_global` stake validator is present in the transaction's withdrawals:

```aiken
// programmable_logic_base.ak — the entire spend logic
validator programmable_logic_base(stake_cred: Credential) {
  spend(_datum, _redeemer, _own_ref, self: Transaction) {
    list.any(self.withdrawals, fn(wdrl) {
      let Pair(cred, _amount) = wdrl
      cred == stake_cred
    })
  }
}
```

This pattern is critical for performance: spending validators run once *per input*, but stake validators (via withdrawals) run only once *per transaction*. Since the global validator contains the expensive registry lookups and transfer logic invocations, running it once instead of N times (for N inputs) saves significant execution units.

---

## Withdraw-Zero Pattern

The **withdraw-zero pattern** is the mechanism that invokes stake validators without actual staking activity. A transaction includes a withdrawal of 0 ADA from a script's reward address, which forces the ledger to execute that script's `withdraw` handler.

### How It Works

1. The transaction includes `withdrawals: [(script_credential, 0)]`
2. The Cardano ledger sees a withdrawal from a script address and runs the validator
3. The validator's `withdraw` handler executes with access to the full transaction context
4. The 0 ADA withdrawal has no economic effect — it's purely a trigger mechanism

### Why It Matters

This pattern enables three critical capabilities:

1. **Single execution for multiple inputs** — The global validator runs once per transaction, not once per UTxO input. This is essential for multi-input transfers.
2. **Composable validation** — Multiple stake validators can be invoked in the same transaction (global + transfer logic + issuer logic), each checking different aspects.
3. **Pluggable logic** — Transfer logic scripts are registered in the on-chain registry as stake credentials. Any new transfer logic can be deployed without modifying the core validators.

### In Practice

A transfer transaction includes these withdrawals:

```
withdrawals:
  - (programmable_logic_global, 0 ADA)    # Core validation
  - (transfer_logic_script,     0 ADA)    # Token-specific rules
```

The global validator checks that the appropriate transfer logic script is also in the withdrawal list (i.e., it has been invoked). This creates a chain of validation: base → global → transfer logic.

---

## On-Chain Registry

The registry is a **sorted linked list** of registered programmable token policies, stored as UTxOs on-chain. Each node is a UTxO containing an NFT marker and an inline datum.

### Structure

```mermaid
graph LR
    O["Origin Node<br/>key: ∅<br/>next: 0xabc..."] -->|"points to"| A["Node A<br/>key: 0xabc...<br/>next: 0xdef..."]
    A -->|"points to"| B["Node B<br/>key: 0xdef...<br/>next: 0xfff..."]
    B -->|"points to"| END["(sentinel)<br/>0xfff...fff"]

    style O fill:#e1f5ff
    style A fill:#fff4e1
    style B fill:#fff4e1
    style END fill:#f0f0f0
```

Each node is a UTxO with:
- **An NFT** from `registry_mint` policy (token name = `key`, or empty string for origin)
- **An inline datum** of type `RegistryNode` containing the policy key, next pointer, and script references

### O(1) Membership Proofs

The sorted linked list enables constant-time membership and non-membership proofs:

**Token exists** (`TokenExists { node_idx }`): The proof points to a registry node where `node.key == token_policy_id`. The validator checks:
1. The node has an authentic NFT from `registry_node_cs`
2. `node.key == currency_symbol`
3. `node.transfer_logic_script` is in the transaction's withdrawals

**Token does not exist** (`TokenDoesNotExist { node_idx }`): The proof points to a "covering node" where `node.key < token_policy_id < node.next`. Since the list is sorted and complete, this proves no node with that key exists.

```
Covering node proof:

  node.key = 0xabc...    (less than target)
  target   = 0xbcd...    (the policy we're looking up)
  node.next = 0xdef...   (greater than target)

  → 0xbcd... is NOT in the registry
```

This is how the global validator handles non-programmable tokens in the same transaction — it doesn't reject them; it simply skips validation for tokens proven not to be in the registry.

### Insertion

Inserting a new token into the registry (`RegistryInsert`):

1. Find the covering node where `covering.key < new_key < covering.next`
2. Spend the covering node UTxO
3. Create two output UTxOs:
   - **Updated covering node**: `key` unchanged, `next` → `new_key`
   - **New node**: `key` = `new_key`, `next` = old `covering.next`
4. Mint one NFT with token name = `new_key`
5. Validate that `new_key` is a legitimate programmable token (via `IssuanceCborHex` template matching)

```
Before:  [covering: key=A, next=C]
After:   [covering: key=A, next=B]  [new: key=B, next=C]
```

---

## Denylist System

The denylist uses the same sorted linked list pattern as the registry, but for credential hashes instead of policy IDs. It is part of the freeze-and-seize substandard.

### Structure

Each `BlacklistNode` contains:
- `key`: The denylisted credential hash (28 bytes)
- `next`: The next credential hash in sorted order

### Operations

| Operation | Description | Authorization |
|-----------|-------------|--------------|
| `BlacklistInit` | Create origin node | One-shot (UTxO consumed) |
| `BlacklistInsert` | Add credential to denylist | Manager signature required |
| `BlacklistRemove` | Remove credential from denylist | Manager signature required |

### Non-Membership Proofs in Transfers

During a transfer, the `freeze_and_seize_transfer` validator:

1. Extracts all stake credential hashes from programmable token inputs
2. For each credential, requires a `NonmembershipProof { node_idx }` pointing to a covering node
3. Validates `node.key < credential_hash < node.next` for each proof
4. If any credential IS denylisted (no valid covering node exists), the transaction fails

This means every transfer of a denylist-protected token requires O(n) proofs where n is the number of unique stake credentials in the transaction inputs — but each individual proof is O(1).

---

## Data Structures

### RegistryNode

```aiken
type RegistryNode {
  key: ByteArray,                              // Policy ID of the registered token
  next: ByteArray,                             // Next key in sorted order
  transfer_logic_script: Credential,           // Stake validator for transfer rules
  third_party_transfer_logic_script: Credential, // Stake validator for seizure/freeze
  global_state_cs: ByteArray,                  // Optional NFT for global state (e.g., denylist)
}
```

### BlacklistNode

```aiken
type BlacklistNode {
  key: ByteArray,   // Denylisted credential hash
  next: ByteArray,  // Next key in sorted order
}
```

### ProgrammableLogicGlobalParams

Stored on-chain in a UTxO marked by the protocol params NFT:

```aiken
type ProgrammableLogicGlobalParams {
  registry_node_cs: PolicyId,  // Currency symbol of registry NFTs
  prog_logic_cred: Credential, // Payment credential of programmable_logic_base
}
```

### Redeemers

**Global validator** (`ProgrammableLogicGlobalRedeemer`):

```aiken
type ProgrammableLogicGlobalRedeemer {
  // Normal transfer: one proof per non-ADA policy in the inputs
  TransferAct { proofs: List<RegistryProof> }
  // Admin action (seize): operates on specific input/output indices
  ThirdPartyAct {
    registry_node_idx: Int,
    input_idxs: List<Int>,
    outputs_start_idx: Int,
    length_input_idxs: Int,
  }
}
```

**Registry proofs** (`RegistryProof`):

```aiken
type RegistryProof {
  TokenExists { node_idx: Int }        // Points to the matching registry node
  TokenDoesNotExist { node_idx: Int }  // Points to the covering node
}
```

**Denylist proofs** (`BlacklistProof`):

```aiken
type BlacklistProof {
  NonmembershipProof { node_idx: Int } // Points to the covering node
}
```

### IssuanceCborHex

Used during registration to verify that a policy ID was generated from the correct issuance script template:

```aiken
type IssuanceCborHex {
  prefix_cbor_hex: ByteArray,   // Prefix of the minting policy script
  postfix_cbor_hex: ByteArray,  // Postfix of the minting policy script
}
```

The registration validator reconstructs the script as `version_header ++ prefix ++ hashed_param ++ postfix`, hashes it with blake2b_224, and checks the result matches the policy ID being registered.

---

## Validation Flows

### Transfer Flow (Step by Step)

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant TX as Transaction
    participant PLB as programmable_logic_base
    participant PLG as programmable_logic_global
    participant REG as Registry (ref input)
    participant TL as transfer_logic_script

    TX->>PLB: Spend token UTxO
    PLB->>PLB: Check: is PLG in withdrawals?
    PLB-->>TX: ✓ Delegates to global

    TX->>PLG: Withdraw 0 ADA (TransferAct)
    PLG->>PLG: Find protocol params (ref input)
    PLG->>PLG: Sum all inputs from prog_logic_cred
    PLG->>PLG: Verify each input's stake cred signed/invoked

    loop For each non-ADA policy in inputs
        PLG->>REG: Check proof[i]
        alt TokenExists
            REG-->>PLG: node.key == policy ✓
            PLG->>PLG: Check node.transfer_logic_script in withdrawals
        else TokenDoesNotExist
            REG-->>PLG: node.key < policy < node.next ✓
            PLG->>PLG: Skip (not programmable)
        end
    end

    PLG->>PLG: Sum programmable token values
    PLG->>PLG: Sum outputs at prog_logic_cred
    PLG->>PLG: Assert outputs ≥ programmable inputs

    TX->>TL: Withdraw 0 ADA (token-specific redeemer)
    TL->>TL: Apply token-specific rules
    TL-->>TX: ✓ Transfer approved
```

Key invariant: the total programmable token value in outputs at the `prog_logic_cred` address must be **at least** the total programmable token value from signed inputs. This prevents tokens from "escaping" the programmable logic address.

### Third-Party (Seize) Flow

The `ThirdPartyAct` redeemer handles admin operations like token seizure. It differs from transfers:

1. **No ownership check** — the `third_party_transfer_logic_script` authorizes the action instead of the stake credential owner
2. **Token removal** — seized tokens are removed from the victim's UTxO (output value = input value minus seized policy)
3. **Strict input-output mapping** — each input at `input_idxs[i]` maps to an output at `outputs_start_idx + i`
4. **Same address/datum** — the output must preserve the victim's address and datum, only removing the seized tokens
5. **Anti-DDOS** — the input and output values must actually differ (prevents no-op seizures)

### Token Registration Flow

1. Build a transaction that mints tokens with the new policy **and** inserts a registry node
2. The `registry_mint` validator:
   - Finds the `IssuanceCborHex` reference input (template bytes)
   - Verifies `blake2b_224(version_header ++ prefix ++ hashed_param ++ postfix) == new_policy_id`
   - Verifies the covering node covers the insertion point
   - Validates the two output nodes maintain sorted order
3. The `registry_spend` validator allows spending the covering node because `registry_mint` is active

---

## Security Properties

### NFT Authenticity
Every registry and denylist node is marked with an NFT from a one-shot minting policy. Validators always check `has_currency_symbol(node.value, expected_cs)` before trusting any datum. This prevents forged registry entries.

### Ownership Enforcement
The global validator iterates over **all** inputs from `prog_logic_cred` and requires each one to be authorized by its stake credential (signature for verification keys, withdrawal invocation for scripts). If any input lacks authorization, the entire transaction fails.

### Value Preservation
During transfers, the global validator computes the total programmable token value from authorized inputs and verifies that outputs at `prog_logic_cred` contain **at least** that much value. Tokens cannot be moved to non-programmable addresses.

### Sorted List Integrity
Both registry and denylist maintain the invariant `node.key < node.next` for every node. Insertions verify the covering node covers the new key. This prevents duplicate entries and ensures covering-node proofs are always valid.

### One-Shot Policies
Protocol parameters, registry, denylist, and issuance CBOR hex NFTs use one-shot minting policies (parameterized by a UTxO reference). This guarantees exactly one instance of each can exist, preventing duplication attacks.

### Anti-DDOS in Seizures
The `ThirdPartyAct` handler explicitly checks that the input value differs from the expected output value (`input_dict != expected_output_dict`). This prevents adversaries from submitting no-op seizure transactions that waste on-chain resources.

---

**Next**: Return to the [README](../README.md) for build instructions, or see the [Introduction](./01-INTRODUCTION.md) for high-level concepts.

Commit message:

chore: highlight difference between cip113 as the standard and substantards

src/programmable-tokens-onchain-aiken/documentation/02-ARCHITECTURE.md, after:

# Architecture Deep-Dive

This document explains the on-chain architecture of the CIP-113 programmable tokens implementation in Aiken. It covers the ownership model, validator coordination, on-chain data structures, and step-by-step validation flows.

---

## Table of Contents

1. [Ownership Model](#ownership-model)
2. [Validator Architecture](#validator-architecture)
3. [Withdraw-Zero Pattern](#withdraw-zero-pattern)
4. [On-Chain Registry](#on-chain-registry)
5. [Denylist System](#denylist-system)
6. [Data Structures](#data-structures)
7. [Validation Flows](#validation-flows)
8. [Security Properties](#security-properties)

---

## Ownership Model

### Shared Payment Credential + Unique Stake Credentials

The fundamental design insight is that Cardano addresses are composed of two parts: a **payment credential** and a **stake credential**. Programmable tokens exploit this by using a single shared payment credential (the `programmable_logic_base` script hash) while assigning unique stake credentials to individual holders.

```
Cardano Address = Payment Credential + Stake Credential
                  ─────────────────   ────────────────
                  Shared across ALL    Unique per holder
                  programmable tokens  (determines ownership)
```

This means:

- **All programmable tokens live at addresses that share the same payment credential** — the `programmable_logic_base` validator hash. This is what enables unified validation: every spend from this payment credential triggers the same spending validator.
- **Ownership is determined by the stake credential** — either a verification key (for wallet holders) or a script hash (for smart contract-controlled holdings).
- **Wallets require integration** — tokens are native assets at the ledger level, but wallets need to resolve stake-credential-based ownership at the shared script address to display balances correctly.

### Transferring Tokens

A transfer changes the stake credential while keeping the payment credential constant:

```
Before:  addr(programmable_logic_base, stake_alice) → 100 USDC
After:   addr(programmable_logic_base, stake_bob)   → 100 USDC
```

The `programmable_logic_base` payment credential is the same in both cases. What changes is who "owns" the UTxO — determined by the stake credential.

---

## Validator Architecture

The system uses a layered architecture where lightweight validators delegate to a central coordinator.

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Token Custody"
        PLB[programmable_logic_base<br/><i>Spending Validator</i>]
    end

    subgraph "Coordination Layer"
        PLG[programmable_logic_global<br/><i>Stake Validator</i>]
    end

    subgraph "Registry"
        RM[registry_mint<br/><i>Minting Policy</i>]
        RS[registry_spend<br/><i>Spending Validator</i>]
    end

    subgraph "Token Issuance"
        IM[issuance_mint<br/><i>Minting Policy</i>]
        ICH[issuance_cbor_hex_mint<br/><i>Minting Policy</i>]
    end

    subgraph "Protocol Bootstrap"
        PP[protocol_params_mint<br/><i>Minting Policy</i>]
    end

    subgraph "Substandard: Transfer Logic"
        TL[example_transfer_logic<br/><i>Stake Validator</i>]
        FES[freeze_and_seize_transfer<br/><i>Stake Validator</i>]
    end

    subgraph "Substandard: Denylist"
        BM[blacklist_mint<br/><i>Minting Policy</i>]
        BS[blacklist_spend<br/><i>Spending Validator</i>]
    end

    PLB -->|"delegates to"| PLG
    PLG -->|"looks up"| RS
    PLG -->|"invokes"| TL
    PLG -->|"invokes"| FES
    FES -->|"checks"| BS
    RM -->|"validates structure"| RS
    IM -->|"references"| ICH
```

The diagram above separates the **core CIP-113 standard** (Token Custody, Coordination Layer, Registry, Token Issuance, Protocol Bootstrap) from **substandards** (Transfer Logic, Denylist). The core standard is deployed once and shared by all programmable tokens. Substandards are pluggable — different tokens can register different transfer logic and supporting validators depending on their compliance requirements, without modifying the core framework.

### Validator Reference

**Core Standard (CIP-113 Framework)**

| Validator | Type | Parameters | Purpose |
|-----------|------|------------|---------|
| `programmable_logic_base` | Spend | `stake_cred` | Custody of all programmable token UTxOs. Delegates to global validator. |
| `programmable_logic_global` | Stake (withdraw) | `protocol_params_cs` | Core coordinator. Validates transfers, checks registry, invokes transfer logic. |
| `protocol_params_mint` | Mint | `utxo_ref` | One-shot mint of the protocol parameters NFT. |
| `registry_mint` | Mint | `utxo_ref`, `issuance_cbor_hex_cs` | Manages the sorted linked list of registered token policies. |
| `registry_spend` | Spend | `protocol_params_cs` | Guards registry node UTxOs; only allows spending when `registry_mint` is active. |
| `issuance_mint` | Mint | `programmable_logic_base`, `minting_logic_cred` | Mints/burns programmable tokens. Parameterized per token type. |
| `issuance_cbor_hex_mint` | Mint | `utxo_ref` | One-shot mint of the reference NFT holding issuance script template bytes. |

**Example Substandards**

| Validator | Type | Parameters | Purpose |
|-----------|------|------------|---------|
| `example_transfer_logic` | Stake (withdraw) | `permitted_cred` | Simple transfer logic: requires a specific credential to authorize. |
| `freeze_and_seize_transfer` | Stake (withdraw) | `programmable_logic_base_cred`, `blacklist_node_cs` | Denylist-aware transfer logic for regulated tokens. |
| `blacklist_mint` | Mint | `utxo_ref`, `manager_pkh` | Manages the sorted linked list of denylisted credentials. |
| `blacklist_spend` | Spend | `blacklist_cs` | Guards denylist node UTxOs; only allows spending when `blacklist_mint` is active. |

### Dual Validator Delegation

The `programmable_logic_base` validator is intentionally minimal. Its only job is to verify that the `programmable_logic_global` stake validator is present in the transaction's withdrawals:

```aiken
// programmable_logic_base.ak — the entire spend logic
validator programmable_logic_base(stake_cred: Credential) {
  spend(_datum, _redeemer, _own_ref, self: Transaction) {
    list.any(self.withdrawals, fn(wdrl) {
      let Pair(cred, _amount) = wdrl
      cred == stake_cred
    })
  }
}
```

This pattern is critical for performance: spending validators run once *per input*, but stake validators (via withdrawals) run only once *per transaction*. Since the global validator contains the expensive registry lookups and transfer logic invocations, running it once instead of N times (for N inputs) saves significant execution units.

---

## Withdraw-Zero Pattern

The **withdraw-zero pattern** is the mechanism that invokes stake validators without actual staking activity. A transaction includes a withdrawal of 0 ADA from a script's reward address, which forces the ledger to execute that script's `withdraw` handler.

### How It Works

1. The transaction includes `withdrawals: [(script_credential, 0)]`
2. The Cardano ledger sees a withdrawal from a script address and runs the validator
3. The validator's `withdraw` handler executes with access to the full transaction context
4. The 0 ADA withdrawal has no economic effect — it's purely a trigger mechanism

### Why It Matters

This pattern enables three critical capabilities:

1. **Single execution for multiple inputs** — The global validator runs once per transaction, not once per UTxO input. This is essential for multi-input transfers.
2. **Composable validation** — Multiple stake validators can be invoked in the same transaction (global + transfer logic + issuer logic), each checking different aspects.
3. **Pluggable logic** — Transfer logic scripts are registered in the on-chain registry as stake credentials. Any new transfer logic can be deployed without modifying the core validators.

### In Practice

A transfer transaction includes these withdrawals:

```
withdrawals:
  - (programmable_logic_global, 0 ADA)    # Core validation
  - (transfer_logic_script,     0 ADA)    # Token-specific rules
```

The global validator checks that the appropriate transfer logic script is also in the withdrawal list (i.e., it has been invoked). This creates a chain of validation: base → global → transfer logic.

---

## On-Chain Registry

The registry is a **sorted linked list** of registered programmable token policies, stored as UTxOs on-chain. Each node is a UTxO containing an NFT marker and an inline datum.

### Structure

```mermaid
graph LR
    O["Origin Node<br/>key: ∅<br/>next: 0xabc..."] -->|"points to"| A["Node A<br/>key: 0xabc...<br/>next: 0xdef..."]
    A -->|"points to"| B["Node B<br/>key: 0xdef...<br/>next: 0xfff..."]
    B -->|"points to"| END["(sentinel)<br/>0xfff...fff"]

    style O fill:#e1f5ff
    style A fill:#fff4e1
    style B fill:#fff4e1
    style END fill:#f0f0f0
```

Each node is a UTxO with:
- **An NFT** from `registry_mint` policy (token name = `key`, or empty string for origin)
- **An inline datum** of type `RegistryNode` containing the policy key, next pointer, and script references

### O(1) Membership Proofs

The sorted linked list enables constant-time membership and non-membership proofs:

**Token exists** (`TokenExists { node_idx }`): The proof points to a registry node where `node.key == token_policy_id`. The validator checks:
1. The node has an authentic NFT from `registry_node_cs`
2. `node.key == currency_symbol`
3. `node.transfer_logic_script` is in the transaction's withdrawals

**Token does not exist** (`TokenDoesNotExist { node_idx }`): The proof points to a "covering node" where `node.key < token_policy_id < node.next`. Since the list is sorted and complete, this proves no node with that key exists.

```
Covering node proof:

  node.key = 0xabc...    (less than target)
  target   = 0xbcd...    (the policy we're looking up)
  node.next = 0xdef...   (greater than target)

  → 0xbcd... is NOT in the registry
```

This is how the global validator handles non-programmable tokens in the same transaction — it doesn't reject them; it simply skips validation for tokens proven not to be in the registry.

### Insertion

Inserting a new token into the registry (`RegistryInsert`):

1. Find the covering node where `covering.key < new_key < covering.next`
2. Spend the covering node UTxO
3. Create two output UTxOs:
   - **Updated covering node**: `key` unchanged, `next` → `new_key`
   - **New node**: `key` = `new_key`, `next` = old `covering.next`
4. Mint one NFT with token name = `new_key`
5. Validate that `new_key` is a legitimate programmable token (via `IssuanceCborHex` template matching)

```
Before:  [covering: key=A, next=C]
After:   [covering: key=A, next=B]  [new: key=B, next=C]
```

---

## Denylist System

The denylist uses the same sorted linked list pattern as the registry, but for credential hashes instead of policy IDs. It is part of the freeze-and-seize substandard.

### Structure

Each `BlacklistNode` contains:
- `key`: The denylisted credential hash (28 bytes)
- `next`: The next credential hash in sorted order

### Operations

| Operation | Description | Authorization |
|-----------|-------------|--------------|
| `BlacklistInit` | Create origin node | One-shot (UTxO consumed) |
| `BlacklistInsert` | Add credential to denylist | Manager signature required |
| `BlacklistRemove` | Remove credential from denylist | Manager signature required |

### Non-Membership Proofs in Transfers

During a transfer, the `freeze_and_seize_transfer` validator:

1. Extracts all stake credential hashes from programmable token inputs
2. For each credential, requires a `NonmembershipProof { node_idx }` pointing to a covering node
3. Validates `node.key < credential_hash < node.next` for each proof
4. If any credential IS denylisted (no valid covering node exists), the transaction fails

This means every transfer of a denylist-protected token requires O(n) proofs where n is the number of unique stake credentials in the transaction inputs — but each individual proof is O(1).

---

## Data Structures

### RegistryNode

```aiken
type RegistryNode {
  key: ByteArray,                              // Policy ID of the registered token
  next: ByteArray,                             // Next key in sorted order
  transfer_logic_script: Credential,           // Stake validator for transfer rules
  third_party_transfer_logic_script: Credential, // Stake validator for seizure/freeze
  global_state_cs: ByteArray,                  // Optional NFT for global state (e.g., denylist)
}
```

### BlacklistNode

```aiken
type BlacklistNode {
  key: ByteArray,   // Denylisted credential hash
  next: ByteArray,  // Next key in sorted order
}
```

### ProgrammableLogicGlobalParams

Stored on-chain in a UTxO marked by the protocol params NFT:

```aiken
type ProgrammableLogicGlobalParams {
  registry_node_cs: PolicyId,  // Currency symbol of registry NFTs
  prog_logic_cred: Credential, // Payment credential of programmable_logic_base
}
```

### Redeemers

**Global validator** (`ProgrammableLogicGlobalRedeemer`):

```aiken
type ProgrammableLogicGlobalRedeemer {
  // Normal transfer: one proof per non-ADA policy in the inputs
  TransferAct { proofs: List<RegistryProof> }
  // Admin action (seize): operates on specific input/output indices
  ThirdPartyAct {
    registry_node_idx: Int,
    input_idxs: List<Int>,
    outputs_start_idx: Int,
    length_input_idxs: Int,
  }
}
```

**Registry proofs** (`RegistryProof`):

```aiken
type RegistryProof {
  TokenExists { node_idx: Int }        // Points to the matching registry node
  TokenDoesNotExist { node_idx: Int }  // Points to the covering node
}
```

**Denylist proofs** (`BlacklistProof`):

```aiken
type BlacklistProof {
  NonmembershipProof { node_idx: Int } // Points to the covering node
}
```

### IssuanceCborHex

Used during registration to verify that a policy ID was generated from the correct issuance script template:

```aiken
type IssuanceCborHex {
  prefix_cbor_hex: ByteArray,   // Prefix of the minting policy script
  postfix_cbor_hex: ByteArray,  // Postfix of the minting policy script
}
```

The registration validator reconstructs the script as `version_header ++ prefix ++ hashed_param ++ postfix`, hashes it with blake2b_224, and checks the result matches the policy ID being registered.

---

## Validation Flows

### Transfer Flow (Step by Step)

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant TX as Transaction
    participant PLB as programmable_logic_base
    participant PLG as programmable_logic_global
    participant REG as Registry (ref input)
    participant TL as transfer_logic_script

    TX->>PLB: Spend token UTxO
    PLB->>PLB: Check: is PLG in withdrawals?
    PLB-->>TX: ✓ Delegates to global

    TX->>PLG: Withdraw 0 ADA (TransferAct)
    PLG->>PLG: Find protocol params (ref input)
    PLG->>PLG: Sum all inputs from prog_logic_cred
    PLG->>PLG: Verify each input's stake cred signed/invoked

    loop For each non-ADA policy in inputs
        PLG->>REG: Check proof[i]
        alt TokenExists
            REG-->>PLG: node.key == policy ✓
            PLG->>PLG: Check node.transfer_logic_script in withdrawals
        else TokenDoesNotExist
            REG-->>PLG: node.key < policy < node.next ✓
            PLG->>PLG: Skip (not programmable)
        end
    end

    PLG->>PLG: Sum programmable token values
    PLG->>PLG: Sum outputs at prog_logic_cred
    PLG->>PLG: Assert outputs ≥ programmable inputs

    TX->>TL: Withdraw 0 ADA (token-specific redeemer)
    TL->>TL: Apply token-specific rules
    TL-->>TX: ✓ Transfer approved
```

Key invariant: the total programmable token value in outputs at the `prog_logic_cred` address must be **at least** the total programmable token value from signed inputs. This prevents tokens from "escaping" the programmable logic address.

### Third-Party (Seize) Flow

The `ThirdPartyAct` redeemer handles admin operations like token seizure. It differs from transfers:

1. **No ownership check** — the `third_party_transfer_logic_script` authorizes the action instead of the stake credential owner
2. **Token removal** — seized tokens are removed from the victim's UTxO (output value = input value minus seized policy)
3. **Strict input-output mapping** — each input at `input_idxs[i]` maps to an output at `outputs_start_idx + i`
4. **Same address/datum** — the output must preserve the victim's address and datum, only removing the seized tokens
5. **Anti-DDOS** — the input and output values must actually differ (prevents no-op seizures)

### Token Registration Flow

1. Build a transaction that mints tokens with the new policy **and** inserts a registry node
2. The `registry_mint` validator:
   - Finds the `IssuanceCborHex` reference input (template bytes)
   - Verifies `blake2b_224(version_header ++ prefix ++ hashed_param ++ postfix) == new_policy_id`
   - Verifies the covering node covers the insertion point
   - Validates the two output nodes maintain sorted order
3. The `registry_spend` validator allows spending the covering node because `registry_mint` is active

---

## Security Properties

### NFT Authenticity
Every registry and denylist node is marked with an NFT from a one-shot minting policy. Validators always check `has_currency_symbol(node.value, expected_cs)` before trusting any datum. This prevents forged registry entries.

### Ownership Enforcement
The global validator iterates over **all** inputs from `prog_logic_cred` and requires each one to be authorized by its stake credential (signature for verification keys, withdrawal invocation for scripts). If any input lacks authorization, the entire transaction fails.

### Value Preservation
During transfers, the global validator computes the total programmable token value from authorized inputs and verifies that outputs at `prog_logic_cred` contain **at least** that much value. Tokens cannot be moved to non-programmable addresses.

### Sorted List Integrity
Both registry and denylist maintain the invariant `node.key < node.next` for every node. Insertions verify the covering node covers the new key. This prevents duplicate entries and ensures covering-node proofs are always valid.

### One-Shot Policies
Protocol parameters, registry, denylist, and issuance CBOR hex NFTs use one-shot minting policies (parameterized by a UTxO reference). This guarantees exactly one instance of each can exist, preventing duplication attacks.

### Anti-DDOS in Seizures
The `ThirdPartyAct` handler explicitly checks that the input value differs from the expected output value (`input_dict != expected_output_dict`). This prevents adversaries from submitting no-op seizure transactions that waste on-chain resources.

---

**Next**: Return to the [README](../README.md) for build instructions, or see the [Introduction](./01-INTRODUCTION.md) for high-level concepts.
